Biology is the science that studies life. What exactly is life? This may sound like a silly question with an obvious answer, but it is not easy to define life. For example, a branch of biology called virology studies viruses, which exhibit some of the characteristics of living entities but lack others. It turns out that although viruses can attack living organisms, cause diseases, and even reproduce, they do not meet the criteria that biologists use to define life.

From its earliest beginnings, biology has wrestled with four questions: What are the shared properties that make something “alive”? How do those various living things function? When faced with the remarkable diversity of life, how do we organize the different kinds of organisms so that we can better understand them? And, finally—what biologists ultimately seek to understand—how did this diversity arise and how is it continuing? As new organisms are discovered every day, biologists continue to seek answers to these and other questions.

Properties of Life
All groups of living organisms share several key characteristics or functions:

Order: Organisms are highly organized structures that consist of one or more cells. Even very simple, single-celled organisms are remarkably complex.

Sensitivity or Response to Stimuli: Organisms respond to diverse stimuli. For example, plants can bend toward a source of light or respond to touch. Even tiny bacteria can move toward or away from chemicals (a process called chemotaxis) or light (phototaxis).

Reproduction: Single-celled organisms reproduce by first duplicating their DNA, which is the genetic material, and then dividing it equally as the cell prepares to divide to form two new cells. Many multicellular organisms produce specialized reproductive cells that will form new individuals.

Adaptation: All living organisms exhibit a “fit” to their environment, known as adaptation. It is a consequence of evolution by natural selection, which operates in every lineage of reproducing organisms.

Growth and Development: Organisms grow and develop according to specific instructions coded for by their genes.

Regulation/Homeostasis: Even the smallest organisms require multiple regulatory mechanisms to maintain life. Homeostasis refers to the relatively stable internal environment required to maintain life.

Energy Processing: All organisms use a source of energy for their metabolic activities.

Evolution: The diversity of life on Earth is a result of mutations, or random changes in hereditary material over time.

When viewed together, these characteristics serve to define life.
